TASK
Implement a disaster recovery (DR) strategy that:

Ensures rapid failover with minimal downtime (low RTO)

Preserves data integrity and availability (low RPO)

Automatically reroutes traffic and services to unaffected regions

Provides timely alerts to operations teams

ACTION
The following Google Cloud-native solutions are used to mitigate and recover from the outage:

🔁 1. Cloud SQL Failover via Cross-Region Replicas
Beforehand: Configure Cloud SQL primary instance in us-central1 with a read replica in us-east1.

During outage: Promote the replica as the new primary using:

bash
Copy
Edit
gcloud sql instances promote-replica <REPLICA_NAME>
Update application configurations to point to the new database endpoint.

🌍 2. Highly Available Storage with Multi-Region Cloud Storage
Store all critical files, assets, and backups in multi-region buckets (e.g., us or nam4).

These buckets automatically serve data from healthy regions without manual intervention.

⚙️ 3. Resilient Compute Infrastructure
Deploy services in GKE Autopilot or Managed Instance Groups (MIGs) across us-east1 and us-west1.

Use Global HTTP(S) Load Balancer with health checks to dynamically route traffic away from affected regions.

📩 4. Message Continuity with Global Pub/Sub
Use global Pub/Sub topics to ensure messages continue to flow, even during regional disruption.

Deploy subscriber services in multiple regions and configure dead-letter topics for reliability.

📣 5. Monitoring, Alerts & Automation
Set up Cloud Monitoring with regional uptime checks.

Trigger Cloud Functions or Cloud Workflows via Pub/Sub when an outage is detected:

Notify response teams via Slack, PagerDuty, or email

Automate key failover steps such as DNS updates or replica promotions

🔐 6. Secret Management
Store credentials and secrets in Cloud Secret Manager with multi-region replication enabled, ensuring availability regardless of regional outages.

RESULT
Near-zero RPO achieved via real-time replication and multi-region storage.

RTO kept under 15 minutes through proactive monitoring and automated/manual failover.

Traffic and services are seamlessly redirected to unaffected regions with minimal user disruption.

Engineering teams receive immediate alerts and follow defined DR workflows to restore full functionality.

✅ Final DR Architecture Summary
Component	DR Mechanism
Cloud SQL	Cross-region replica with manual promotion
Cloud Storage	Multi-region bucket (us or nam4)
Compute	Multi-region deployments + Global Load Balancer
Pub/Sub	Global topics + multi-region subscribers
Monitoring	Regional uptime checks + automated alert triggers
Secret Manager	Multi-region replication for credentials/secrets

Let me know if you'd like a visual diagram or Infrastructure as Code (Terraform/YAML) version of this setup.











